Add runtime-modes page (#4181)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: Fundamentals/Setup/Server-Setup/runtime-modes.md

---
versionFrom: 10.1.0
---

# Runtime modes

_This section describes how to use the runtime mode setting to optimize Umbraco for the best development experience or optimal production environment._

## Configuring the runtime mode

You can configure the runtime mode to optimize Umbraco for different development experiences and environments by setting `Umbraco:CMS:Runtime:Mode` to one of the available modes:

- `BackofficeDevelopment` (default)
- `Development`
- `Production`

This can be done via the `appsettings.json` file, environment variables or any other .NET configuration provider (like Azure Key Vault/App Configuration). Although this setting affects how Umbraco behaves at runtime, some modes have prerequisites on how the project is built/published. Make sure to read the descriptions of each mode before changing this setting from the default `BackofficeDevelopment` mode, as incorrect configuration can result in your application not starting (by throwing a `BootFailedException`).

## BackofficeDevelopment mode

> The `BackofficeDevelopment` mode is the default behavior for Umbraco: it does not optimize Umbraco for any specific environment and does not have any prerequisites. This mode allows for rapid development (without having to recompile/rebuild your project), including doing all development from within the backoffice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `BackofficeDevelopment` mode is the default behavior for Umbraco: it does not optimize Umbraco for any specific environment and does not have any prerequisites. This mode allows for rapid development (without having to recompile/rebuild your project), including all development from within the backoffice.
```

## Development mode

> The `Development` mode can be used when you're developing from an IDE (like Visual Studio, VS Code or Rider) or the dotnet CLI (e.g. using `dotnet watch`) and is a recommend prerequisite if you want to use `Production` mode in your production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Development` mode can be used when you're developing from an IDE (like Visual Studio, VS Code, or Rider) or the dotnet CLI (e.g. using `dotnet watch`). It is a recommended prerequisite if you want to use the `Production` mode in your production environment.
```

This mode disables in-memory ModelsBuilder generation and validates the following setting:
- `Umbraco:CMS:ModelsBuilder:ModelsMode` is not set to `InMemoryAuto`.

> If you want to use the generated models, use `SourceCodeAuto` or `SourceCodeManual`, which requires manually recompiling the project after the models have changed (e.g. after updating Document Types, Media Types, Member Types or Data Types). Razor views (`cshtml` files) will still be automatically compiled at runtime, allowing you to quickly iterate on the rendered output from templates, (macro) partial views and view components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to use the generated models, use `SourceCodeAuto` or `SourceCodeManual`, which requires manually recompiling the project after the models have changed (e.g. after updating Document Types, Media Types, Member Types, or Data Types). Razor views (`cshtml` files) will still be automatically compiled at runtime, allowing you to quickly iterate on the rendered output from templates, (macro) partial views, and view components.
```

The recommended approach to enable `Development` mode is to update the `appsettings.json` file with the following settings:

```json
{
    "Umbraco": {
        "CMS": {
            "Runtime": {
                "Mode" : "Development"
            },
            "ModelsBuilder":{
                "ModelsMode": "SourceCodeAuto"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> Now ensure your models are generated by running Umbraco and going to Settings > Models Builder > Generate models. You can now remove the following properties from your `csproj` project file to enable compilation of Razor views (which also ensures your views don't contain compilation errors and is a prerequisite for enabling `Production` mode):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure your models are generated by running Umbraco and navigating to **Settings** > **Models Builder** > **Generate models**. You can remove the following properties from your `csproj` project file to enable the compilation of Razor views (which also ensures your views do not contain compilation errors and is a prerequisite for enabling `Production` mode):
```

```xml
<RazorCompileOnBuild>false</RazorCompileOnBuild>
<RazorCompileOnPublish>false</RazorCompileOnPublish>

> <CopyRazorGenerateFilesToPublishDirectory>true</CopyRazorGenerateFilesToPublishDirectory>

Reviewer 2: After some additional testing, the `CopyRazorGenerateFilesToPublishDirectory` property needs to be left enabled to ensure Deploy can generate signatures for templates (otherwise you'll get schema mismatches):
```suggestion
```

```

> Fix any compilation errors you might get after this, e.g. if you accidentally referenced deleted models or properties. Running the application should now still show the rendered content and you're now ready to optionally enable `Production` mode on your production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fix any compilation errors you might get after this, e.g. if you accidentally referenced deleted models or properties. Running the application will still show the rendered content and you're now ready to optionally enable `Production` mode on your production environment.
```

## Production mode

Use `Production` mode to ensure your production environment is running optimally by disabling development features and validating whether specific settings are configured to their recommended production values.

> This mode disables both in-memory ModelsBuilder generation (see `Development` mode) and Razor (cshtml) runtime compilation, requiring you to compile your views at build/publish time and enforces the following settings for optimal performance/security:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This mode disables both in-memory ModelsBuilder generation (see [Development mode](#development-mode)) and Razor (cshtml) runtime compilation. Production mode requires you to compile your views at build/publish time and enforces the following settings for optimal performance/security:
```

- The application is built/published in Release mode (with JIT optimization enabled), e.g. using `dotnet publish --configuration Release`;
- `Umbraco:CMS:WebRouting:UmbracoApplicationUrl` is set to a valid URL;
- `Umbraco:CMS:Global:UseHttps` is enabled;
- `Umbraco:CMS:RuntimeMinification:CacheBuster` is set to a fixed cache buster like `Version` or `AppDomain`;
- `Umbraco:CMS:ModelsBuilder:ModelsMode` is set to `Nothing`.

The recommended approach to enable `Production` mode is to update the `appsettings.Production.json` file (or create one) with the following settings:

```json
{
  "Umbraco": {
    "CMS": {
      "Runtime": {
        "Mode": "Production"
      },
      "Global": {
        "UseHttps": true
      },
      "ModelsBuilder": {
        "ModelsMode": "Nothing"
      },
      "WebRouting": {
        "UmbracoApplicationUrl": "https://<REPLACE_WITH_YOUR_PRIMARY_DOMAIN>/"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Although you can still edit document types and views (if not running from the published output), changes won't be picked up until you've rebuilt your project or republished the application. Also note that models won't be generated by ModelsBuilder (because the mode is set to `Nothing`), requiring your to do all your changes while in `Development` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although you can still edit document types and views (if not running from the published output), changes won't be picked up until you've rebuilt your project or republished the application. 

:::note
Models won't be generated by ModelsBuilder (because the mode is set to `Nothing`), requiring you to do all your changes while in `Development` mode.
:::
```

Also ensure the `UmbracoApplicationUrl` is updated to the primary URL of your production environment, as this is used when sending emails (password reset, notifications, health check results, etc.) and the keep-alive task.

## Customize/extend runtime mode validation

> Validation of the above mentioned settings are done when determining the runtime level during startup using the new `IRuntimeModeValidationService` and when it fails, causes a `BootFailedException` to be thrown. The default implementation gets all registered `IRuntimeModeValidators` to do the validation, making it possible to remove default checks and/or add your own (inherit from `RuntimeModeProductionValidatorBase` if you only want to validate against the production runtime mode). The following validators are added by default:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validation of the above-mentioned settings is done when determining the runtime level during startup using the new `IRuntimeModeValidationService` and when it fails, causes a `BootFailedException` to be thrown. The default implementation gets all registered `IRuntimeModeValidators` to do the validation, making it possible to remove default checks and/or add your own (inherit from `RuntimeModeProductionValidatorBase`, if you only want to validate against the production runtime mode). The following validators are added by default:
```

- `JITOptimizerValidator` - Ensure the application is built/published in Release mode (with JIT optimization enabled) when in production runtime mode, e.g. using `dotnet publish --configuration Release`;
- `UmbracoApplicationUrlValidator` - ensure `Umbraco:CMS:WebRouting:UmbracoApplicationUrl` is configured when in production runtime mode;
- `UseHttpsValidator` - ensure `Umbraco:CMS:Global:UseHttps` is enabled when in production runtime mode;
- `RuntimeMinificationValidator` - ensure `Umbraco:CMS:RuntimeMinification:CacheBuster` is set to a fixed cache buster like `Version` or `AppDomain` when in production runtime mode;

> - `ModelsBuilderModeValidator` - ensure `Umbraco:CMS:ModelsBuilder:ModelsMode` is not set to `InMemoryAuto` when in development runtime mode and set to `Nothing` when in production runtime mode.

Reviewer 2: Now that PR https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco-CMS/pull/12693 is merged, we can add the following sample code to show how you can remove default and/or add custom runtime mode validators:

```suggestion
- `ModelsBuilderModeValidator` - ensure `Umbraco:CMS:ModelsBuilder:ModelsMode` is not set to `InMemoryAuto` when in development runtime mode and set to `Nothing` when in production runtime mode.

The following example removes the default `UmbracoApplicationUrlValidator` and adds a new custom `DisableElectionForSingleServerValidator`:

    using System.Diagnostics.CodeAnalysis;
    using Microsoft.Extensions.Options;
    using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Composing;
    using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Configuration.Models;
    using Umbraco.Cms.Infrastructure.Runtime;
    using Umbraco.Cms.Infrastructure.Runtime.RuntimeModeValidators;
    
    public class RuntimeModeValidatorComposer : IComposer
    {
        public void Compose(IUmbracoBuilder builder)
            => builder.RuntimeModeValidators()
                .Remove<UmbracoApplicationUrlValidator>()
                .Add<DisableElectionForSingleServerValidator>();
    }
    
    public class DisableElectionForSingleServerValidator : IRuntimeModeValidator
    {
        private readonly IOptionsMonitor<GlobalSettings> _globalSettings;
    
        public DisableElectionForSingleServerValidator(IOptionsMonitor<GlobalSettings> globalSettings) => _globalSettings = globalSettings;
    
        public bool Validate(RuntimeMode runtimeMode, [NotNullWhen(false)] out string? validationErrorMessage)
        {
            if (_globalSettings.CurrentValue.DisableElectionForSingleServer == false)
            {
                validationErrorMessage = "Disable primary server election (and support for load balancing) to improve startup performance.";
                return false;
            }
    
            validationErrorMessage = null;
            return true;
        }
    }
```

Reviewer 2: I've indented the sample code 4 spaces (as mentioned in the Markdown conventions for our Docs), but other code blocks still use ` ```json` and ` ```xml` style markup...

Reviewer: @ronaldbarendse, you can either use 4 spaces or add an optional language identifier to enable syntax highlighting in your fenced code block. We might need to update the Markdown conventions article with this info 🙂

---
versionFrom: 10.1.0
---

# Runtime modes

_This section describes best practices with running Umbraco in production._

## What are runtime modes?

> Runetime modes are settings you can enable via your Appsettings.json, that enforces best practices for different styles of development or production

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Runtime modes are settings you can enable via your Appsettings.json, which enforce best practices for different styles of development or production.
```

There are 3 available runtime modes in Umbraco:

- BackofficeDevelopment
- Development
- Production

## BackofficeDevelopment mode

> BackofficeDevelopment mode is the default behavior for Umbraco, and does not enforce any settings at all

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
BackofficeDevelopment mode is the default behavior for Umbraco and it does not enforce any settings at all.
```

                "ModelsMode": "SourceCodeAuto"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Now ensure your models are generated by running Umbraco and going to Settings > Models Builder > Generate models.
You're now able to remove the following from your csproj file:

```c#
    <RazorCompileOnBuild>false</RazorCompileOnBuild>
    <RazorCompileOnPublish>false</RazorCompileOnPublish>
    <CopyRazorGenerateFilesToPublishDirectory>true</CopyRazorGenerateFilesToPublishDirectory>
```

If you run the application, it should now be in development mode.

# Production mode

Production mode is made for running your site in production, this mode enforces you to have set "UseHttps" to true, and "UmbracoApplicationUrl" to the canonical url of your Umbraco installation.

To enable production mode, add a `appsettings.Production.json` file to your project with the following settings: 

```json
{
  "Umbraco": {
    "CMS": {
      "Runtime": {
        "Mode": "Production"
      },
      "Global": {
        "UseHttps": true
      },
      "ModelsBuilder": {
        "ModelsMode": "Nothing"
      },
      "WebRouting": {
        "UmbracoApplicationUrl": "https://localhost:5001/"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Do note to use "ModelsMode": "Nothing" you have to have already generated your models before setting this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Although you can still edit document types and views (if not running from the published output), changes won't be picked up until you've rebuilt your project or republished the application. Also note that models won't be generated by ModelsBuilder (because the mode is set to `Nothing`), requiring your to do all your changes while in `Development` mode.

Also ensure the `UmbracoApplicationUrl` is updated to the primary URL of your production environment, as this is used when sending emails (password reset, notifications, health check results, etc.) and the keep-alive task.

## Customize/extend runtime mode validation

Validation of the above mentioned settings are done when determining the runtime level during startup using the new `IRuntimeModeValidationService` and when it fails, causes a `BootFailedException` to be thrown. The default implementation gets all registered `IRuntimeModeValidators` to do the validation, making it possible to remove default checks and/or add your own (inherit from `RuntimeModeProductionValidatorBase` if you only want to validate against the production runtime mode). The following validators are added by default:
- `JITOptimizerValidator` - Ensure the application is built/published in Release mode (with JIT optimization enabled) when in production runtime mode, e.g. using `dotnet publish --configuration Release`;
- `UmbracoApplicationUrlValidator` - ensure `Umbraco:CMS:WebRouting:UmbracoApplicationUrl` is configured when in production runtime mode;
- `UseHttpsValidator` - ensure `Umbraco:CMS:Global:UseHttps` is enabled when in production runtime mode;
- `RuntimeMinificationValidator` - ensure `Umbraco:CMS:RuntimeMinification:CacheBuster` is set to a fixed cache buster like `Version` or `AppDomain` when in production runtime mode;
- `ModelsBuilderModeValidator` - ensure `Umbraco:CMS:ModelsBuilder:ModelsMode` is not set to `InMemoryAuto` when in development runtime mode and set to `Nothing` when in production runtime mode.
```

The last part can be updated when PR https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco-CMS/pull/12693 is merged, making it a much nicer experience to remove default runtime mode validators.
